# Overview

This repo contains resources to help others understand Ansible

# Setup

These tutorials can be run anywhere that Ansible is installed.

To help my life easier there is a docker compose file that pulls in 5 containers to build a lab

```
./setup-docker-lab.sh
```

To make the training a little more relastic the lab contains:

- ansible conatiner
- web1 conatiner
- web2 conatiner
- backend1 conatiner
- backend2 conatiner

You can then access the docker container running ansible with:

```
docker exec -i -t ansibletraining_ansible_1 /bin/bash
```

# Setting up ansible

In the lab we have prepared this in advance but for users not using docker you'll need to:

- Setup SSH keys to access the nodes you want to manage (you can use passwords but this is sloppy)
- Setup an ansible hosts file like the one in ansible_config/ansible_hosts

# Test the installation

Test the install by running an ansible ping to all the nodes:

```
ansible -i /root/ansible_config/ansible_hosts all -m ping
```

# Basic scripting

## Running commands across your nodes

Run a simple echo across all nodes
```
ansible -i /root/ansible_config/ansible_hosts all -a "/bin/echo hello"
```

Or run the same command against just the webservers
```
ansible -i /root/ansible_config/ansible_hosts web_servers -a "/bin/echo hello"
```

## Writing code to action commands (playbooks)

Start by SSHing to one of the nodes:

```
ssh ansibletraining_backend2_1
```

Notice how no message of the day is set

Now execute the message of the day playbook by running:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/motd.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

You'll see the playbook is very basic. It is using the copy module and specifies a motd we created under templates. 
It takes this template and copies it up to each server.

Ansible shows us the file is changed. If we re-ran the command nothing would change.

### Persistency

Now change the file on one of the servers by running:

```
ssh ansibletraining_backend2_1 "echo Naughty, we changed the message of the day > /etc/motd"
```

ssh back into the server and we'll see our new banner.

If you re-run the platybook you'll that only that node is arked as being changed.
SSHing back in after running the playbook will show our configuration is back in place.

# Troubleshooting

## dry-run

Taking the example above if we again change the message of the day on a single container:

```
ssh ansibletraining_backend2_1 "echo Naughty, we changed the message of the day > /etc/motd"
```

Then SSH to the server confirm the change. If we now run the playbook in a dry run with:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/motd.yaml -i ansible_hosts --check
```

You can see in the output it tells us what the proposed changes are. If we SSH back to the server we see it hasn't actually made any changes.

## Versbose

If you get errors running playbooks it can be very useful to run ansible with verbose log output:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/motd.yaml -i ansible_hosts --check -v
```

Will give us more detail about the proposed changes

you can increase verbosity by adding 'v's:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/motd.yaml -i ansible_hosts --check -vvv
```

## Debug

It can also be useful to be able to print values from your playbokk itself. Especially as you start doing more advanced scripting using jinja templating.

In the first example we are going to use the command module to simply run an echo on each server:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/without-debug.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

This gives us limited information about the status of the command. By adding in a register option to the command and then printing the output with debug we can get far more information:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/with-debug.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

To see the difference between the two playbooks run:

```
diff playbooks/with-debug.yaml playbooks/without-debug.yaml
```

# More advanced scripting

## Variables

There are a few types variables. Some are system generated by ansible (ansible facts) things like the hostname or network interface details like IP.

Then there are user defined variables. These can be pre-set via a variables file, defined at the top of a playbook, or inserted at the command line when the playbook is run.


### Ansible facts

You can see all the ansible facts for a host by running:

```
ansible -i ansible_hosts -m setup ansibletraining_web1_1
```

We can then reference these variables in our playbooks. To see an example of this run:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/ansible-facts.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

This prints out the mount points on each server.

### Playbook vairables

You can add a vars statement to playbooks. Run the following to see an example:

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/playbook-variables.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

### Command line vairables

Variables can be set when running the playbook like so:

```
ansible-playbook --extra-vars '{"MY_CLI_VAR_1":"shizzle","MY_CLI_VAR_2":"nizzle"}' playbooks/cli-variables.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

or

```
ansible-playbook -e MY_CLI_VAR_1=shizzle -e MY_CLI_VAR_2=nizzle playbooks/cli-variables.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

## Conditionals

As you're playbooks become more complicated it can be useful to start to run conditional statements against variables. For example say one of our web servers is primary and the other secondary
and we want different things done on each.

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/conditional.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

In this example we are checking the hostname of the server we are running on and only running if we match a specific value.

## Templating

Templating is a realy powerful way to allow you to build up more complex logic in your ansible configuration.

Building on the example above if we wanted to have different configuration on two servers based on their hostnames we can create a jinja template and place conditional statements to place different configuration values.

If we run the following the message of the day will be set differently on web2 vs web2.

```
ansible-playbook playbooks/motd-advanced.yaml -i ansible_hosts
```

We can validate this by SSHing to each container:

```
ssh ansibletraining_web1_1
ssh ansibletraining_web2_1
```

# Resources

There are many resources available for ansible. To find modules to interact with systems checkout:

http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/modules_by_category.html

For more details and advanced docs and tutorials checkout:

http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/intro.html

